Let's talk about lifecycle hooks.
We talked about components and
how they're mounted and they're unmounted.
And we even used a lifecycle hook before,
but what does that really mean?
We have a bunch of different
things available to us.
And if you're coming
from a React background,
you'll be like, I know about this,
it's very similar.
We have all of these hooks where
we're observing that whether or
not that component has been mounted or
unmounted.
So we have before we've created
the component, created beforeMount,
mounted, I kind of made
the little notes here.
These are my opinions.
Created is a great place to call APIs.
Mounted is great place to
work on DOM operations.
So let's say you're doing something with
d3 or you're loading an animation library.
If you're accessing something inside
of that DOM, it needs to be in
the mounted hook, because otherwise it
will error cuz it doesn't exist yet.
Whereas, well, for APIs it doesn't really
matter if the DOM has fully loaded or
anything.
You can call the API in advance of that.
In fact, you probably should because
then you can kind of get going quicker.
Activated and deactivated,
are things that are only available
to you when you're using keep-alive.
You noticed how we had this kind of moment
with that keep-alive where we started
activating and unactivating a component
that otherwise would have been unmounted.
So there's actually a hook for
that as well.
BeforeUnmount, unmounted,
what I really like about the lifecycle
methods in Vue is they're really legible.
I know exactly what each one
of these means as I read it.
If you're familiar with Vue 2,
these two have changed.
So it used to be beforeDestroyed and
destroyed.
Now it's beforeUnmount, unmounted, which I
really like because it's like beforeMount,
mounted, beforeUnmount, unmounted.
There's more symmetry,
it's a little bit easier.
So we also got renderTracked and
renderTriggered.
And this is new in Vue 3 as well.
And it's really good for debugging,
and I'll show you what I mean.
So if we look at this
lifecycle of this child
when we check the console,
we're hiding and showing child,
we're like beforeCreate, created,
beforeMount, mounted, beforeUnmounted,
mounted, and then we have these
renderTriggered and renderTracked.
You now know what trigger and
track is because we did that whole
section about Vue's reactivity system and
what trigger and
track means in Vue's reactivity system.
So you actually know exactly what
we're plugging into here and
what these kind of keys and targets are.
So that's part of the reason why I was
showing you that if you really need to do
finite debugging,
you know what states those are in.
So if we look at this code pen, really,
I'm just console logging
things in this pen.
So I'm hooking into, This app,
I'm saying is showing as false,
I'm toggling between those states.
And then we've got this child component
that has beforeCreate, created,
beforeMount, mounted.
One thing you'll notice is
when we used methods and
computed in watchers,
we use them in an object like this
with a method inside, so
like, get thing or whatever.
With these, you're really
just using them as functions.
They're not inside another lifecycle
hook object or something like that.
We're using them as functions.
I also, if you need to execute a lot of
logic, what I would say is you should
create a method and
call it from these hooks.
It makes it a little bit more legible
when somebody is maintaining the code and
they're kind of going
through each one of those.
And here we've got the renderTracked,
renderTriggered,
and it's JSON stringifying
all of these things.
Lifecycle hooks also
auto-bind to the instance so
that you can use the component's state and
methods.
So you don't have to console
log what this refers to.
You can say this dot counter and
you know exactly what that is,
which is really nice.
And for that reason,
if you do call a method,
remember to say this dot method
name of whatever you're doing.
For this reason though, you shouldn't use
an error function on a lifecycle method.
It will return the parent instead of
giving you a nice binding out of the box.
So same thing that we
encountered with methods.
If you wanna see a really nice diagram,
we just redid this whole diagram.
And when I say we,
I didn't actually do this one.
So it was probably Ben Hong,
I think, who redid this.
And we have all of these in and
it shows beforeCreate, created, and
this kind of flow chart that shows you
when all of these things were made.
So that's a really useful diagram.
He did a great job with it.